# Summary

Nietzche (N) suffered a progressive dementia of at least 10 years duration. He
died age 55 in 1900.

His father also died young (age 36) of a progressive organic dementia.
Post-portem showed widespread focal brain pathology.

N had suffered from eye pain, joint pain and severe headaches from
adolescence. There is some evidence he had unequal pupils in adolescence, and
eye examinations as an adult showed choroidoretinitis (inflammation within the
eyeball).

He later went on to suffer episodes of severe and disabling abdominal pain and
vomiting in addition to severe and long-lasting headaches.

During army service age 24 he had a sternal injury which resulted in
a prolonged poorly-healing abscess.

In later adulthood his work shows increasing mania, and he had to be admitted
to a psychiatric clinic after this became very severe in 1889.

Initial examination in 1889 confirmed unequal pupils, and found increased
knee-jerk reflexes. Diagnosed by Otto Binswanger (famous Swiss Neurologist) as
having neurosyphilis.

Later in his illness he had several strokes.

There was no post-mortem.

Case summarized by Hemelsoet et al.

## Diagnosis

The combination of the progressive organic dementia, with unequal pupils,
presenting young (age 44), with later focal strokes, does make the initial
diagnosis of neurosyphilis seem likely. N had severe problems with headaches
and eye pain from youth, both of which continue and worsen until at least
1889. The headaches are difficult to diagnose, the eye pain appears to have
been choroidoretinitis, consistent with syphilis. The combination of symptoms
dating from early adolescence with the early death of N\'s father from an
organic dementia makes congenital syphilis the most likely diagnosis.

The problem with this diagnosis is the very slow time-course compared to the
data we have on the course of acquired neurosyphilis. It may be that the
time-course of congenital neurosyphilis is not the same as that for acquired
neurosyphilis, but this does need some explaining.

On the other hand, other diagnoses need N to have more than one rare condition
to explain the combination of early eye symptoms, headaches and his later
dementia.
