# FN - RW letter 27 Sept 1876

from <http://www.thenietzschechannel.com/correspondence/eng/nlett-1876.htm>

Also at <http://www.nietzschesource.org/#eKGWB/BVN-1876,556>

DeepL:

Dearest Friend!

You gave me pleasure with the small commission you gave me: it reminds me of
the Tribschen days. I now have time to think about the past, both distant and
recent, because I sit a lot in the dark room, taking atropine for my eyes,
which were found to need it after my return home. Autumn, after this summer, is
more autumn for me, and probably not only for me, than any previous autumn.
Behind the great event lies a streak of blackest melancholy, from which one
cannot escape quickly enough to Italy or to work or to both. When I think of
you in Italy, I recall that it was there that you found the inspiration for the
beginning of the Rheingold music. May it always remain for you the land of
beginnings! Then you will get rid of the Germans for a while, and it seems to
be necessary here and there to be able to do something decent for them.

You may know that I am also going to Italy next month, but not, as I believe,
to a land of beginnings, but to a land of the end of my suffering. These are at
a climax again; it is really the highest time: my authorities know what they
are doing when they give me a whole year's leave, although this sacrifice is
disproportionately large for such a small community; they would lose me in one
way or another if they didn't give me this escape; in the last few years,
thanks to the forbearance of my temperament, I have swallowed pain after pain,
as if I was born for that and nothing more. I have practically paid my tribute
in abundance to the philosophy that this teaches. This neuralgia proceeds so
thoroughly, so scientifically, it formally probes to what limit I can endure
pain, and always takes itself thirty hours for this examination. Every four to
eight days I must expect a repetition of this study: you see, it is the illness
of a scholar; but now I am sick of it, and I want to live healthily or not live
at all. Complete rest, mild air, walks, dark rooms – that is what I expect from
Italy; I dread having to see or hear anything there. Don't think that I am
morose; it is not illnesses, only people that can upset me, and I always have
the most helpful and considerate friends around me. First, after my return, the
moralist Dr. Rée, now the musician Köselitz, the same one who is writing this
letter; I also want to mention Mrs. Baumgartner among my good friends; perhaps
you will be pleased to hear that the French translation of my last writing
(R<ichard> W<agner> i<n> B<ayreuth>) by this woman will be printed next month.

If I were in the mood, I would compose a travel blessing for you; but this
stork has once again not built its nest on me, which it can be forgiven for. So
please accept my warmest wishes, which may follow you as good companions: to
you and your esteemed wife, my “noblest friend,” to steal one of the most
unauthorized Germanisms from the Jew Bernays.
